Smbfs is a filesystem that implements the SMB protocol, which is the
protocol used by Windows for Workgroups, Windows 95 and Windows NT.
Smbfs was inspired by Samba, the program written by Andrew Tridgell
that turns any unix host into a file server for DOS or Windows clients.
See ftp://nimbus.anu.edu.au/pub/tridge/samba/ for this interesting
program suite and much more information on SMB, NetBIOS over TCP/IP,
and explanations for concepts like netbios name or share.

To use smbfs, you must first install the Samba package (Samba-1.9.18p1 or
later). This package includes the special smbmount utility needed to mount
smbfs volumes. Refer to the smbmount(8) and smbmnt(8) manpages for the
details regarding smbfs mounts.

The smbmount utility reads the Samba smb.conf config file for some of its
options, and at least one of these is important for smbfs operation. You
should enable the TCP_NODELAY socket option, or else directory listings
will be dramatically slower (under Win NT at least).

Mount-Time Options
Windows 95 has several bugs that affect SMB operations, and smbfs includes
work-arounds for all of the bugs found (so far, at least.) These can be
enabled at compile-time with the CONFIG_SMB_WIN95 kernel option.

Unfortunately, some of the Win 95 work-arounds interact with Win NT bugs,
so if you're using several different types of servers on your network you
probably want to enable the work-arounds at mount time. To do this, answer
`N' to the CONFIG_SMB_WIN95 option, and add the needed options listed below
to the file mode argument of the mount command for the Win 95 servers.

Option                  Value  Effect
Identify Win 95 Server    1    Enables bug fixes
Use Core Attributes       2    Speeds up directory scans, only mtime
Use Dir Attributes        4    Alternate way to get file attributes

To apply the options, sum the values and prepend it to the file mode. For
example, to use options 1 and 2 with file mode 755, you would specify 3755:

	mount /mnt/tmp -f 3755

Smbfs will print a message at mount time confirming the selected options.
Note that _only_ Windows 95 servers require special treatment; using the
"core attributes" option with Win NT will give trash timestamp values.

To summarize, if your network includes both Win 95 and NT servers:
(1) Do _not_ enable the CONFIG_SMB_WIN95 kernel option

(2) Add the desired work-around options to the mount command for your
    Win 95 server(s).
